the emperor is the largest species of
penguin weighing in at up to 38
kilograms a third of which is blubber
the more body fat the more likely they
are to survive the coming winter
but to maintain it they need to hunt
diving longer and deeper than any other
penguin they hold their breath for up to
20 minutes at a time to maximize their
chance of finding food and building up
their vital fat stores but all that bulk
comes out of price and poses an
interesting problem how does a bird the
same weight as a baby hippo get itself
back out of the water
a recent revelatory study suggests an
intriguing solution a team of European
scientists recently looked again in more
detail at some long observed penguin
behaviour at the end of a long dive
instead of jumping straight out of the
water many emperor's surface for a short
time and then dive back down again only
then do they shoot back up to the
surface
this time accelerating clear of the
water so why do they have this temporary
pit stop the obvious answer is that they
returned for a much-needed gulp of air
and a bit of rest
before diving back down to pick up
enough speed for their grand exit but
what the research team now think is
going on is actually a lot more
interesting when the birds come to the
surface they appear to preen but in fact
they are actively collecting air within
a fine downy mesh at the base of their
feathers as the Penguins descend the
water pressure increases reducing the
volume of the trapped air by up to 75
percent the birds again rely on their
individual muscles at the base of each
feather this time they clamp them shut
locking in the compacted air that
they've collected when it's time to exit
the penguin then swims upwards as fast
as it can the trapped air in the plumage
expands during their ascent and pause
through the feathers producing the
bubbly wakes we can see behind them the
tiny micro bubbles form a lubricating
coat of air that surrounds the penguin
this drastically reduces drag and allows
them to accelerate to twice their normal
swimming speed at the point they leave
the water
this flightless bird finally becomes
airborne
Oh